## Popgen

### Audience

[TODO]

### Overview of sgkit's API methods

Sgkit provides a number of methods for computing statistics in population genetics. Before running the methods, the dataset is usually divided into windows along the genome, using the `window_by_*` functions, which tell sgkit to produce per-window statistics. For example, `window_by_position` creates windows that are a fixed number of base pairs, while `window_by_interval` creates windows corresponding to arbitrary user-defined intervals.

It's common in population genetics to group samples into populations, which in sgkit are referred to as _cohorts_. There are two types of statistics: one-way statistics where there is a single statistic for each cohort, and multi-way statistics where there is a statistic between each pair, triple, etc of cohorts. [TODO: do we need to say how cohorts are defined?]

The methods for one-way statistics include `diversity` for computing mean genetic diversity, `Tajimas_D` for computing Tajima’s D, and `Garud_H` for computing the H1, H12, H123 and H2/H1 statistics defined in [@doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1005004].

The methods for multi-way statistics include `divergence` and `Fst` for computing mean genetic divergence and F[ST] (respectively) between pairs of cohorts, and `pbs` for computing the population branching statistic between cohort triples.

### Example

We converted phased Ag1000G hypotype data in Zarr format [@https://www.malariagen.net/data/ag1000g-phase-2-ar1] to sgkit's Zarr format using the `read_scikit_allel_vcfzarr` function. The data contained 1,164 samples at 39,604,636 sites, and was [TODO] MB on disk before conversion, and Y MB after conversion to sgkit's Zarr format. Data for the X chromosome was discarded since it was not available for all samples. The conversion took [TODO] minutes Y seconds, including a postprocessing `rechunk` step to ensure that the data was suitably chunked for the subsequent analysis.